CHAPTER XIX of PROVERBS. KING JAMES' VERSION.
This LibriVox recording is in the public domain.
Recording by Michael Packard.
Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity,
Than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.
Also that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good,
And he that hasteth with his feet, sinneth.
The foolishness of man perverteth his way,
And his heart fredeth against the Lord.
Wealth maketh many friends,
But the poor is separated from his neighbor.
A false witness shall not be unpunished,
And he that speaketh lies shall not escape.
Many will entreat the favor of the prince,
And every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.
All the brethren of the poor do hate him,
And how much more do his friends go far from him?
He pursueth them with words, yet they are wanting to him.
He that geteth wisdom loveth his own soul,
He that keepeth understanding shall find good.
A false witness shall not be unpunished,
And he that speaketh lies shall perish.
Delight is not seemly for a fool,
Much less for a servant to have rule over princes.
The discretion of a man differeth his anger,
And it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion,
But his favor is as dew upon the grass.
A foolish son is the calamity of his father,
And the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
House and riches are the inheritance of fathers,
And a prudent wife is from the Lord.
Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep,
And an idle soul shall suffer hunger.
He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul,
But he that despiseth his ways shall die.
He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord,
And that which he hath given will he pay him again.
Chasen thy son while there is hope,
And let not thy soul spare for his crying.
A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment,
For if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again.
Hear counsel, and receive instruction,
That thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.
There are many devices in a man's heart,
Nevertheless the counsel of the Lord that shall stand.
The desire of a man is his kindness,
And a poor man is better than a liar.
The fear of the Lord tendeth to life,
And he that hath it shall abide satisfied.
He shall not be visited with evil.
A slothful man hideeth his hand in his bosom,
And will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.
Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware,
And reprove one that hath understanding,
And he will understand knowledge.
He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother,
Is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.
Cease, my son, to hear the instruction
That causeth to err from the words of knowledge.
An ungodly witness scorneth judgment,
And the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.
Judgments are prepared for scorners,
And stripes for the back of fools.